---
layout: single
author_profile: no
lang: en
title: "About the use of generative AI"

layout: single

path-pt_br: /ai
---

## Intro

The increasing use of generative AI has flooded the internet with technical
articles and infographics which weren't created by humans.

This personal page contains technical writings and (sadly) I need to make clear
about my position on using generative AI here. So, here we are.

### Goals

- Explain that I don't use AI for generating content for this website
- Present personal thoughts about using generative AI
- Present how I use AI

### Non-goals

- Rant about AI
- Create a guideline of using AI
- Tell what's good or bad about AI

## Do I use AI? And what about the evil "algorithms"?

Well...

Let's make it clear something: we've been using AI for **decades**. We've been
using algorithms for **millenia**. If it somehow surprises you, go check
what [artificial intelligence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_artificial_intelligence)
and [algorithms](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algorithm) are. If you're online,
probably you use AI and doesn't even notice it. **Everybody** uses algorithms.

## Do I use **generative** AI?

Yes, but not here.

The LLMs have their own way to write (sometimes called "AI accent"). It is
soulless, too much perfect, generic, sterile and without personality. Texts,
even the technical ones, are not only the about words or what they are
saying, but how they are saying and why they are saying.

Sometimes it's enough to just AI-generated text where the other option would be
only having nothing. It's not the case here, where I would be perfectly fine in
having nothing in this personal site or even don't have a personal site at all.

You may not agree with me, and that's ok. I'm not saying I'm right. On the
contrary, I think it's too early to know what's right about using LLMs. I also
believe this is the case where the technology evolved so fast that we don't
exactly know how to use it. I only think that this is a mid-term approach, which
tries to leverage some benefits of AI without losing the authorship. If you
don't agree with me, I'll b happy to hear your opinion (since it's not
generated by AI <nobr>:-)</nobr>).

## Was any content in this website generated by AI?

**NO**. Again: **NO**. There's no reason for me to generate a text using
generative AI and post it here.

Why? If the content can be generated by an AI, you can ask your favorite LLM to
do so. I won't spend my time doing that. I'm not a "content creator", I don't
post here because of money, I don't have any pressure to do it regularly. Of
course, I'm happy when I see people liking something that I posted here
(e.g., [when I wrote about Ruby and Matz shared it](https://lucasoshiro.github.io/posts-en/2024-06-17-ruby-shellscript/#update-2)), 
but if no one reads, it's ok. But I don't know how can
[someone be happy](https://www.harrypotter.com/pt/fact-file/characters-and-pets/gilderoy-lockhart)
being recognized for something that they didn't do.

I only write something here if I have something to tell.

## Do I hate generative AI?

Like any technology, hating it is pointless. The best we can do is try to find
if, when and how it can be useful.

## Do I generate code with AI?

Yes, but **none** of the projects that I post here were generated by LLM (or
"vibe-coded") **yet**. If some day I use an LLM to generate something, I'll make it
clear somewhere (e.g. adding Claude or Copilot as co-authors in commits).

However, I'm not against it by itself. If my job is to make something work and
AI-generated code helps me do that, I think would be ok to use. But we need to
be [**responsible**](https://pt.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ben_Parker) for what we're
doing. If I can't explain exactly what the code is doing, I wouldn't deliver
it.

## Do I generate text with AI?

Yes, but not here. This is my personal page where I share my personal
stuff. What I generate with AI is not personal and won't be posted here.

## Do I use generative AI in my personal projects?

I have some ideas of side projects integrating LLMs through their APIs, but
their code will be 100% written by me. I work on side projects because I want to
learn and because I want to have them fun with them, and I can't learn something
or have fun asking an LLM to do the dirty work.

Maybe someday I'll need to do a personal project with a wider impact. Then I'll
consider it as **work** and if vibe-coding increases my productivity without
losing the quality, then I'll do it.

Please notice the difference: something personal that I do for fun and for
learning I consider a **side project** and I don't have any commitment for
being _productive_ while developing it; personal projects that are used by
other people are **work**. 
