---
title: OpenSCAD course
excerpt: Introduction course about OpenSCAD

header:
  teaser: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/e/eb/Openscad.svg

lang: en
path-pt_br: /posts/2024-03-24-openscad
---

In January 2024, I gave a
[course](https://www.ime.usp.br/verao/index.php/turmas/descricao/482) about
OpenSCAD and how to use it for 3D printing:

For those who don't know, OpenSCAD is a software and a programming language for
modelling 3D objects, mostly for 3D printing. Being a programming language,
OpenSCAD can be very productive for 3D modelling, as it is fully
parameterizable and have lots of libraries.

This course was a personal challenge, as:
- this is the first course that I have prepared and given;
- this is this perhaps the first course about OpenSCAD in Portuguese;
- the audience was incredibly diverse, as it was composed by about 50 people
  from different work areas (software developers, math teachers, engineers, even
  dentists!), some people knew a lot about programming and some barely knew what
  was it and most people never used a 3D printer!

These are the slides of each class. By now they are only available in
Portuguese, maybe someday I translate them to English...

1. [Class 1]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/pdf/2024-03-24-openscad/1.pdf):
   Introduction to OpenSCAD, how to install it, comparison with other tools;
2. [Class 2]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/pdf/2024-03-24-openscad/2.pdf):
   Introduction to the OpenSCAD programming language, focusing on programming
   aspects such as data types, functions, operators and so on;
3. [Class 3]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/pdf/2024-03-24-openscad/3.pdf): Primitive
   3D objects and their operations;
4. [Class 4]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/pdf/2024-03-24-openscad/4.pdf): Flow
   control and code reuse, with modules and libraries;
5. [Class 5]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/pdf/2024-03-24-openscad/5.pdf): 2D to 3D
   extrusion, importing SVG and STL files;
6. [Class 6]({{ site.baseurl }}/assets/pdf/2024-03-24-openscad/6.pdf):
   Programming good practices, CLI, Python Integration, 3D printing.

Those slides are only a reference. The course itself was more than that. Every
class I demonstrated everything contained in those slides,
live-programming/modelling and showing step-by-step how to think about
everything. There were also some little programming/modelling tasks after every
class that are not show here.
