---
title: "MapoGPS"
excerpt: "Lat/Lng to street guide converter."
author_profile: true
header:
   teaser: /assets/images/software/mapogps.svg

last_modified_at: 2023-02-06

lang: en
path-pt_br: /software/2020-06-06-mapo_gps/

---

Github: [https://github.com/lucasoshiro/MapoGPS](https://github.com/lucasoshiro/MapoGPS).

If you are in São Paulo, please, enable your location, I promise it will be cool!

<script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/mathjs/6.2.5/math.min.js"></script>
<script src="/assets/js/mapo.js"></script>

## So... what is this

Until not long ago, Waze and Google Maps didn't exit, so people had to use paper
maps. The city where I live here in Brazil, São Paulo, is a huge city with more
than 12 million people, so, a map of this city is so big that needed to be
printed as a book.  You can see how it looks
[here](https://vejasp.abril.com.br/blog/memoria/a-vida-sem-waze/) (if you don't
speak Portuguese, it is fine to Google Translate it). We call it "guia de ruas",
that literally means "street guide".

Personally, when I'm driving I don't like to hear a voice dictating where I
should turn, and I don't feel comfortable with an app deciding where I should
go. I also don't like how the maps are displayed in those apps, I still prefer
how the streets are presented in the street guide. So, even though I'm not so
old (I was born in 1996), I keep a street guide in my car (the most famous one,
Mapograf, that is still published and updated).

So, I wrote this little utility to convert lat/lng coordinates into the
page and coordinates of a street map, for the following reasons:

- I was bored;
- I could bring a little bit of technology for something more traditional;

<span id="coords"></span>

## How do we do it?

### Street guide coordinate system

The pages that contain the maps are numbered from A1 to A99, from B1 to B27 and
from 1 to 432. Each page has a coordinate system where the lines are numbered
from 1 to 30 and the columns are identified from A to Z (with some missing
letters...).

### Conversion overview

The conversion is done in three steps:

1. Converting latitude and longitude into coordinates in a plane, where the
   origin is the center of São Paulo, and using meters as unit;

2. Converting the coordinates in that intermediate plane into another plane,
   where each X unit corresponds to the width of a page, and each Y unit
   corresponds to the height of a page. The origin of that plane is the crossing
   between the most western meridian and most northern parallel represented on
   the street guide;

3. Converting the plane defined in the step 2 into page numbers and page
   coordinates;

<div class="img-container">
  <figure>
    <img class="small" src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/software/2020-06-06-mapo_gps/1.jpg">
    <figcaption>It resembles a dog, but actually it's the worst map of São Paulo you'll see in your life. The red spot is a place and its geographical coordinates.</figcaption>
  </figure>
</div>

<div class="img-container">
  <figure>
    <img class="small" src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/software/2020-06-06-mapo_gps/2.jpg">
    <figcaption>The same place, but now with its relative position to the city center, after step 1.</figcaption>
  </figure>
</div>

<div class="img-container">
  <figure>
    <img class="small" src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/software/2020-06-06-mapo_gps/3.jpg">
    <figcaption>Street guide page grid (in blue) overlaying São Paulo. In black, the position in (page height, page width) relative to the grid origin, after step 2. In orage, the number of the pages, after step 3. </figcaption>
  </figure>
</div>

<div class="img-container">
  <figure>
    <img class="small" src="{{ site.baseurl }}/assets/images/software/2020-06-06-mapo_gps/4.jpg">
    <figcaption>Location inside the page</figcaption>
  </figure>
</div>

However, I've written it in the following order:

### Step 3

Step 3 is quite simple: in the street guide, before the pages that contain the
map itself, there is a small map containing its coverage. That map has a grid
that shows what page contains each area of the city. Then, we can see where each
page is placed and what pages are its neighbors.

Based on that map, I've written the matrix contained in the file
``pages.py``. Note that the matrix ``pages`` contains null pages, that represent
areas that aren't covered by any page in the street guide. This `pages` matrix
is used to build a Cartesian plane, where the origin is the top-left corner of
the first page of the first row. Actually, the first page of the first row
doesn't physically exists, however, it doesn't really matter. Each unit of the X
axis corresponds to the width of a page, and each unit of the Y axis corresponds
to the height of a page.

That way, it is easy to transform a position on the street guide to a position on
that Cartesian plane, and also to transform a position in the Cartesian plane
to a position in the street guide: Catedral da Sé (a church placed on the center
of São Paulo), can be found in the street guide in 151 Z 3. As the page 151 is
placed on the row 13 and on the column 15, we can find the integer part of the
position on the Cartesian plane: (13, 15). The non-integer part of the
coordinates can be calculated after the coordinates inside the page, Z 3. Then,
the position of Catedral da Sé on that plane is (13.0834, 15.975).

### Step 1

Converting geographical coordinates to meters isn't straightforward, and in
order to do that I needed to make some assumptions.

Assuming that the Earth is a perfect sphere, a degree of latitude has the same
length in any place of the planet surface: approximately [10001.965729
km](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Latitude#Length_of_a_degree_of_latitude). 

The length of a degree of longitude, however, depends on the latitude. The
[formula](https://gis.stackexchange.com/questions/251643/approx-distance-between-any-2-longitudes-at-a-given-latitude#answer-251684)
for calculating the length in meters of a **radian** of longitude is given by
the following function:

```m(lat) = cos(lat) * R```

where `R` is the radius of Earth in meters, and `lat` is the lattitude in radians.

In order to calculate the average length of a radian of longitude between two
points of different lattitudes, it is enough to divide the integral of `m`
between the two lattitudes and divide them by the difference between the
lattitudees. Then, we can calculate the average size of a degree, that is:

```(π * R / 180) * (sin(π * b/180) - sin(π * a / 180)) / (b - a)```

where `a` and `b` are the two lattitudes, in degrees.

Once calculated the average size of a degree of longitude, it is enough to
multiply it by the difference in longitude in order to get the difference in
meters from north to south. And it is enough to multiply the length of a degree
of lattitude by the difference in lattitude in order to get the difference in
meters from west to east.

Here I need to make a second assumption: that the Earth is flat in the city of
São Paulo. Just like we did before, that will cause errors, but they are not
relevant.

Given that assumption, it is possible to calculate the position of the point
relative to the center of São Paulo, in meters. Then, we can place it in a
Cartesian plane whose origin is the center of São Paulo, using meter as unit.

### Step 2

In the step 3, we defined a carthesian plane that represents the street guide,
and in the step 1 we defined a plane using the metric system. Step 2 consists in
converting one plane into another, and it is the main conversion step.

The conversion between the two planes is a linear transformation. However, the
transformation matrix is unknown.

In order to find the transformation matrix, I took a sample of several points in
the street guide and their geographical coordinates. Those points are in the
file `pointset.py`. The position of those points was calculated accordingly to
the definitions described before. Given the positions in both planes, it is
possible to perform a linear regression. The linear regression gives us a
transformation matrix that minimizes the error when transforming a plane into
another. Yay!

## Execution

### Dependencies

- Python 3
- Numpy

### How to use

```python3 mapo_gps.py```

The geographical coordinates should be provided in the decimal notation through
`stdin`, then it will return the corresponding pages and page coordinates.

## Found a mistake ?

This script was written for my personal use, and here I'm only sharing how I did
it. I'm not a specialist in GIS, in linear algebra, neither in machine learning.

If you find something wrong in the code or even here, I'll be happy to hear you
in a Github issue or Pull Request.

## 2023 Update

Three years have passed since I wrote that program. A few months after I wrote
the first version of it, I began to work on the backend of delivery company. By
coincidence, I was part of a team that maintened the internal geocoding
microservice! Deal with maps and geographical coordinates, that here was just
for fun, soon after became my routine for the next two years!

For whatever reason, in the step 1 I was reinventing the wheel trying to deduce
how to measure distances of geographical coordinates. Nowadays I see that lost a
lot of time doing that, and I could just use the Haversine formula, that does
exactly that.

Between those three years, I wrote an Android app based on that script. As it is
only meant for my personal use, I don't intend to publish on Play Store. It is
nothing more than take the geographical coordinates from GPS, apply the
transformation described here, and show the results in the screen. Its source
code is on my GitHub, if anyone have interest about it:

[https://github.com/lucasoshiro/MapoGPSAndroid](https://github.com/lucasoshiro/MapoGPSAndroid).
