---
title: "Writing Git from scratch in Haskell"
excerpt: "Diving in deeper concepts and learning something with that"
author_profile: true
header:
   teaser: /assets/images/software/mapogps.svg

last_modified_at: 2023-02-06

lang: en
path-pt_br: /software/2020-06-06-mapo_gps/
---

## Why? But WHY?

And the answer is: why not?

Some time ago, I was really interested in Git and how it works. I was reading
[Pro Git](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2) (if you check other texts that I wrote
you'll see that I mention it a lot), and I found the chapter about Git Internals
really cool. If you have never read that, I **strongly** suggest. It's available
[here](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Internals-Plumbing-and-Porcelain).
It is so well written that I needed to retribute it in some way, and I
contributed to its translation to [Portuguese](https://git-scm.com/book/pt-br/v2/Funcionamento-Interno-do-Git-Encanamento-e-Porcelana).

The explanation about Git internals in that book is quite simple, and it shows
what is going in a way that we could check ouselves. After reading that, I
thought, "why not try to do it myself?". And so, I did it.

And why Haskell? Well, only because I find that language fun and challenging. I
as trying to learn it at the time and that was an opportunity to practice it. At
the end, I think it was an excellent choice. Haskell is a hard language that we
forced to think in a functional way, without any room to do any imperative
code, however, its powerful type system, its idempotency, its null-safety and
its declarative nature made me feel extremely secure. It saved me from hours of
debugging if I had chosen Python, C, Ruby, etc instead.

## Shut up! I want to see what you did

Ok, the code is on [GitHub](https://github.com/lucasoshiro/oshit). There you can
read how you can run it on your computer.

## Acknowledgments

Special thanks to Matheus Tavares and Wilson Moncayo.
